---
title: Single-ID images
discussion: FIXME
---

---

{: .no_toc }

## Table of contents
{: .no_toc .text-delta }

1. TOC
{:toc}

---

## What are the challenges that we are trying to solve?

OCI currently assumes that arbitrary UIDs and GIDs in image layers will be
preserved. This is not the case with fully unprivileged containers, which have
access only to a single UID and a small number of GIDs that are not preserved
across different container runs — they can be arbitrary but are just aliases
of the invoking user's IDs.

Similarly, images generated by fully unprivileged builds don't have meaningful
IDs; they might be those of the invoking user or reset to something arbitrary
to avoid leaking internal IDs (Charliecloud uses 0:0).

(Details and subtleties on all this in [Minimizing privilege for building HPC
containers](https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.07508), by Priedhorsky, Canon, Randles
and Younge.)

## What ideas do we have for how to address these challenges?

1. Flag to mark such images as ID-flattened. Possible values: *no valid IDs*,
   *valid IDs but flattening OK* (default), *valid IDs but flatten with
   caution*. Perhaps the last one warns or requires confirmation. I hesitate
   to include a *valid IDs and do not flatten* because I worry it will be
   abused. Certainly, if that value was in the spec I'd want to add a
   `ch-image(1)` flag to override it.

1. Behave like `tar(1)`: change file ownership to the invoking user on
   unpacking.

## How do these ideas break down into...

### Already existing OCI specs?


### A new project (CNCF or OCI)


## Questions?


## What pre-existing work or software can support these ideas?

`tar(1)` addressed this problem a long time ago by ignoring the UID/GID of
files within the archive and substituting the calling user's when invoked by
unprivileged users.

As a fully unprivileged runtime, Charliecloud already flattens IDs throughout
its workflow.

## Relevant OCI Issues

